doc: add a guide covering basic rules_nixpkgs use + Nix prerequisites (#294)
tweag/rules_nixpkgs: guide.md

---
title: "Fully hermetic Bazel: transitioning to rules_nixpkgs"
---

Bazel is a modern build system valued for performant, correct, and hermetic
builds. We have a sizeable number of Bazel users here at Tweag, and it's
something we are passionate about and often advocate for the use of on the
complex polyglot projects we help clients with.

> It's not without its problems, though, and the one we're interested in today is

Reviewer: > and the one we're interested in today is

Good for the blog post, but I'd leave it out for the user-guide.

many people's build setups. In practice, Bazel build products fail to be
reproducible because Bazel silently depends on various things present in the
global environment, like a C++ compiler.

This ties into another issue, which is that external dependencies have to be
Bazel-ified in order to be usable from within Bazel. For language ecosystems
where there is widespread adoption of a package manager, this isn't much of an
issue --- for instance, `pip` dependencies are taken care of by `rules_python`.
However, in the case of C/C++ projects or with library headers, third-party
dependencies can still be difficult to manage.

The rules_nixpkgs ruleset enables the use of the extensive Nixpkgs package set
from Bazel, allowing it to provision external dependencies via the Nix package
manager. Nix provides strong hermeticity and reproducibility guarantees for all
build products, which are defined in a language also called Nix. A sizeable
collection of such package definitions is available in the Nixpkgs repository,
which can then be used freely from Bazel.

# A basic Bazel project

Let's start with a simple example, on the Bazel "happy path": building a simple

> C/C++ project. The project structure we'll work with is available [here] if

Reviewer: > is available [here]

Link missing.

Author: Added.

INFO: Found 1 target...
Target //src:hello-world up-to-date:
  bazel-bin/src/hello-world
INFO: Elapsed time: 0.063s, Critical Path: 0.00s
INFO: 1 process: 1 internal.
INFO: Build completed successfully, 1 total action
INFO: Build completed successfully, 1 total action
Hello world!
```

# The lack of hermeticity

Bazel is valued for its hermetic and reproducible builds, but this example
already shows that that isn't completely accurate: we haven't told Bazel what
C++ compiler to use or where to find it and all the auxiliary tools it relies
on (linker, assembler, and the like). It simply looks for appropriately-named
executables in the PATH and sets up a C/C++ compiler toolchain called
`@local_config_cc` that "should work". 

This is problematic, and not just because of academic concerns regarding the
precise meaning of "hermeticity": build products output by different versions
of the same compiler can vary greatly, let alone between different compilers.
Bazel, by default, chooses GCC on a Linux machine and Clang/LLVM on a macOS
machine, which can mean that the same bit of hot code, say, vectorizes
correctly on one platform but not on the other due to some difference between

> the two compilers, resulting in wildly different performance characteristics.

Reviewer: Uncontrolled system library versions, e.g. glibc version, could also be a compelling issue.

Author: Added.

There are Bazel-native ways to mitigate these issues, but they fall short of true
hermeticity: for instance, `--incompatible_strict_action_env` runs actions in
an environment that does not inherit a `PATH` from the shell environment, but
instead [sets it to][path-link] the static value `/bin:/usr/bin:/usr/local/bin`.
This means that as long as your compiler tools are in one of those paths, which

> they almost certainly are on \*nix systems, nothing changes.

Reviewer: Generally true, but for the builtin C/C++ toolchain example this is irrelevant. The default C/C++ toolchain setup happens in a repository rule which is unaffected by `--incompatible_strict_action_env`.

Author: Took this out.

# How rules_nixpkgs solves the issue

There are two classes of workaround: one is to give up trying to make Bazel not
depend on the global environment, and instead to control that global
environment ourselves so that the implicit dependencies end up being the same
every time. To do so, we run all builds in sandboxes or VMs that all share the
exact same configuration, for instance, in identical Docker containers.

The other solution is to eliminate the dependency on the global environment by
defining your own compiler toolchain, providing paths to executable binaries that you
provision and version yourself. Bazel can then be instructed to use that
instead of the default `@local_config_cc`. This can be done by checking all the

> relevant executables (`cc`, `ld`, `as`, ...) into your repository yourself, as
> is done within Google for instance. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
relevant executables (`cc`, `ld`, `as`, ...) into your repository yourself. 
```
Not sure if they've documented that properly and publically anywhere. I've been told that's the case, but that's just hearsay.

> In both cases, the build depends on non-code elements (Docker containers,

Reviewer: The Docker case has another issue.
1. It's coarse grained - we don't know exactly which elements of the Docker image we depend on, so, if we change it, we have to invalidate the entire build.
2. Most Dockerfiles out there are not reproducible, e.g. they invoke `apt-get update`. So, if we need to rebuild the Docker image because we want to add just one library, we may incidentally also change other dependencies.

Author: Added.

> executable binaries) for which versioning and maintenance is more complex than

Reviewer: The binary blobs approach also has the problem that it increases the trusted base. I.e. we need to trust that the checked in binary is really the version we want and has the behavior we want.

Author: Added.

for ordinary code. Extra steps must now be followed when these environments
have to be changed or when new releases are cut. Either these configuration
files have to be executed at runtime, necessitating long setup processes for
each executor, or one caches the build products. In the latter case, large
binary blobs have to be managed and moved from machine to machine, often in the
hundreds of gigabytes for Docker images.

> The r_n approach is a variation on the second, where instead of managing system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rules_nixpkgs approach is a variation on the second, where instead of managing system
```
I'd avoid such abbreviations.

Author: Oops, that wasn't supposed to be left in.

> The r_n approach is a variation on the second, where instead of managing system

Reviewer: I'd characterize it as a different approach rather than a variation. The reason is that it enables fine grained dependency tracking on system dependencies and toolchains. E.g. if we only add a system library dependency imported through rules_nixpkgs, it won't affect the CC toolchain and we won't have to invalidate previously built CC targets.

One reason I'd make that distinction is that a variation of the Docker approach is indeed possible with Nix. We could use Nix Docker tools to build a Docker image with the build environment in a reproducible way. However, this still has the issue of being coarse grained, since Bazel doesn't track precisely which parts of the image the build depends on.

Author: Good point, I've clarified this.

    strip_prefix = "rules_nixpkgs-9f08fb2322050991dead17c8d10d453650cf92b7",
    urls = ["https://github.com/tweag/rules_nixpkgs/archive/9f08fb2322050991dead17c8d10d453650cf92b7.tar.gz"],
    sha256 = "46aa0ca80b77848492aa1564e9201de9ed79588ca1284f8a4f76deb7a0eeccb9",
)

# load everything that rules_nixpkgs rules need to work
load("@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs:repositories.bzl", "rules_nixpkgs_dependencies")
rules_nixpkgs_dependencies()
```

Now we can select a version of the Nixpkgs repository from which all of our
packages will be drawn. Any Git commit hash or tag is allowed. This way, we
select a consistent set of package revisions in one go instead of having to
maintain dependency versions for individual dependencies. Often this will be a
tag for a stable release, which ensures that there has been especially
stringent verification that packages in it will function correctly individually
and play well together. Here we use the 22.05 release:

```bazel
load("@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs:nixpkgs.bzl", "nixpkgs_git_repository")
nixpkgs_git_repository(
    name = "nixpkgs",
    revision = "22.05",
    sha256 = "",
)
```

# A hermetic CC toolchain

> Now we can now define a CC toolchain that will be provisioned by Nix using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can define a CC toolchain that will be provisioned by Nix using
```

package definitions from the 22.05 release of Nixpkgs.

```bazel
load("@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs:nixpkgs.bzl", "nixpkgs_cc_configure")
nixpkgs_cc_configure(
  repository = "@nixpkgs",
  name = "nixpkgs_config_cc",
)
```

This will select the default `stdenv.cc` package as the compiler, drawing
auxiliary tools from `stdenv.cc.bintools`. However, one can write a little bit of
Nix to configure this:

```bazel
load("@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs:nixpkgs.bzl", "nixpkgs_cc_configure")
nixpkgs_cc_configure(
  repository = "@nixpkgs",

>   nix_file_content = "(import <nixpkgs> {}).gcc11",

Reviewer: Wouldn't `attribute_path = "gcc11"` achieve the same?

  name = "nixpkgs_config_cc",
)
```

`(import <nixpkgs> {})` loads the entire package set into an attribute set
(Nix's equivalent of a record), and `.gcc11` selects one value from it. It is
possible to customize the compiler further using more Nix if desired: you could,
for instance, point Nix to a custom fork of Clang containing support for a new
architecture, and have everything work seamlessly.

With this, we now have a fully hermetic CC toolchain that will behave correctly
across platforms. It remains to tell Bazel to use it by default, instead of
`@local_config_cc`. To do so, we put the following into `.bazelrc` at the root
of the repository:

```
build --host_platform=@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs/platforms:host

> run   --host_platform=@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs/platforms:host

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
`run` inherits from `build`.

> build --crosstool_top=@nixpkgs_config_cc//:toolchain

Reviewer: Maybe worth mentioning [`https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/7260`](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/7260) as well?

Author: I can't seem to get `--incompatible_enable_cc_toolchain_resolution` to work on this repo, even if I specify the platform name manually on the command line, presumably because I haven't told it to use the `@nixpkgs_config_cc` toolchain. Renaming it to `@local_config_cc` works (and indeed simplifies some of the guide). 

However, if I make that change, I don't know how to adapt the "Making Nix optional" section (or if it needs to be adapted at all: will toolchain resolution silently fall back to the default toolchain?)

Reviewer 2: So far the explanations were very detailed, but here the user is left pondering what these two options really mean. Maybe add a few sentences about them, even if it is in a hand-wavy way?

Reviewer 3: The repository I care about right now (Uber's Go Monorepo) has `--incompatible_enable_cc_toolchain_resolution` set by default; so I presume there are more repositories "in the wild" that uses it.

Perhaps we can add a hint about it, a TODO item, and at least a link to https://github.com/tweag/rules_nixpkgs/issues/289 ?

```

Now `bazel build` and `bazel run` should use this toolchain by default for
C/C++ compilation:
```
> bazel build //src:hello-world
INFO: Analyzed target //src:hello-world (42 packages loaded, 177 targets configured).
INFO: Found 1 target...
Target //src:hello-world up-to-date:
  bazel-bin/src/hello-world
INFO: Elapsed time: 0.377s, Critical Path: 0.22s
INFO: 6 processes: 4 internal, 2 linux-sandbox.
INFO: Build completed successfully, 6 total actions
```

# Making Nix optional

It is entirely possible to make the use of Nix optional in a Bazel setup. To do
so, we use `bazelrc` configs to only enable Nix-specific configuration when a
`--config` flag is provided, like so:

```
build:nix --host_platform=@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs/platforms:host

> run:nix   --host_platform=@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs/platforms:host

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

build:nix --crosstool_top=@nixpkgs_config_cc//:toolchain
```

None of these options will apply to `bazel build` or `bazel run` unless an
extra `--config nix` parameter is passed:

```
> bazel run //src:hello-world --config=nix
...
```

# Working from a Nix-provided developer environment

Another practical advantage of using Nix is that we can provide consistent,
zero-setup development environments to all contributors to a project. These
function similarly to, say, Python virtualenvs, but they're not just limited to
providing dependencies for just one language ecosystem. Even better, they can
provide system dependencies too.

```
> hello
hello: command not found
> nix-shell -p hello
nix-shell> hello
Hello, world!
nix-shell> exit
> hello
hello: command not found
```

There's still a few loose ends in our setup that Nix developer environments can
help tie up. First, the version of Bazel we've been using so far, has been
unspecified. The general practice is to simply use one's distribution's package
manager, something that doesn't deliver consistent Bazel versions across major

> OS platforms. Second, we haven't _disabled_ Bazel's deep-rooted tendency to 

Reviewer: I think the more common practice outside of Nix is to use bazelisk, which can be configured to use a consistent Bazel version for the project.

Author: (Section taken out, see below.)

> depend on the global environment. Indeed, you can rename `.bazelrc` and rerun

Reviewer: Does the example above actually work with a vanilla Bazel bindist? Using rules_nixpkgs with vanilla Bazel (i.e. non-Nix- provided Bazel) is not a supported use-case.

Author: I'll take it out since it's not supported (and getting a Nix-provided Bazel is trivial once you have Nix, so it shouldn't prevent anyone from following this guide.)

Author: I've also added instructions for that (i.e. a basic `nix-shell -p bazel_5`) which I think should be enough.

`bazel run`, and everything will work just fine: Bazel will simply fall back to
`@local_config_cc`, because a C++ compiler toolchain is still globally available.

We can provide a Nix developer environment that only provides the specific dependencies that developers need:

```nix
# flake.nix
{
  inputs = {
    nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-22.05";
    flake-compat = {
      url = github:edolstra/flake-compat;
      flake = false;
    };
    flake-utils.url = github:numtide/flake-utils;
  };
  outputs = { nixpkgs, flake-utils, ... }:
    flake-utils.lib.eachDefaultSystem (system:
      let pkgs = import nixpkgs { inherit system; };
      in
      {
        devShells.default = with pkgs; mkShellNoCC {
          name = "rules_nixpkgs_shell";

>           packages = [ bazel_5 bazel-buildtools cacert gcc nix git ];

Reviewer: Why `gcc`?

        };
      });
}

> ```

Reviewer: I fear that much boilerplate will require some explanation. Maybe you could reference one of the flake templates and then explain where to add the bazel stuff?

Author: I couldn't find a flake template that used flake-utils (which we need for `eachDefaultSystem` in order to have the cross-platform shell that we're advertising) and was sufficiently similar to this that one could just add in the Bazel stuff without complications.

I've cleaned it up a bit and added some comments inline.

> Now developers on different platforms can enter a development environment by

Reviewer: Maybe mention `direnv` integration and how to set up `.envrc`. That makes it much more convenient to use this.

Author: Done.

running `nix develop`. We've also removed the "default" system-wide CC

> toolchain (using `mkShellNoCC` instead of the more common `mkShell`), so

Reviewer: > We've also removed the "default" system-wide CC
> toolchain (using `mkShellNoCC` instead of the more common `mkShell`),

I think Nix specifics like these will require a bit more expanding.

Author: Done.

`@local_config_cc` will no longer work:

```
> bazel build //src:hello-world 
INFO: Build options --crosstool_top, --host_crosstool_top, --host_platform, and 1 more have changed, discarding analysis cache.
[snip]
Auto-Configuration Error: Cannot find gcc or CC; either correct your path or set the CC environment variable

> ```

Reviewer: The guide should make it very clear when a snippet or described approach is considered "correct" and when it is "wrong". I'd also err on the side of "correct" first and "wrong" after (if at all). The reasoning here is this: Guides are often not read top-to-bottom carefully, but rather jumped around in or taken as reference. So, it should be very clear whether a given snippet or approach is safe to copy or not. E.g. the Rust book does this nicely with big visual indications.

Reviewer 4: I also think you should only provide working snippets. Also, are you sure that running in mkShellNoCC will not default to system gcc on non NixOS configurations ?
At this point I am a bit lost in what is the current config, and why. This should probably move to a separate section, and keep the guide focussed on the intended, canonical way to use it with the benefits.

Author: Right, I see what you both mean. I'll rework this section with that feedback in mind.

Author: I took out the error, and explained that bit in detail in words instead.

# A guide to rules_nixpkgs

> TODO: does use flake work with vanilla direnv? nix-direnv is just an improvement over that, i believe

Author: Thanks, I've added the `source_url` directive and added a note about the versions. Since nix-direnv significantly improves upon the support present in vanilla direnv in ways users are likely to notice very soon (caching and automatic GC roots), it makes sense to start users off with it in my opinion.

> TODO: use the same nixpkgs.nix for nixpkgs_git_repository and shell.nix

Author: I've implemented that here: https://github.com/tweag/rules_nixpkgs_cc_template/blob/main/WORKSPACE#L22

> TODO: use the same nixpkgs.nix for nixpkgs_git_repository and shell.nix

Reviewer: I added some comments there
https://github.com/tweag/rules_nixpkgs_cc_template/commit/a3d4e4011f610b4207c1353f4f2c03bb94c31383#r99606471
https://github.com/tweag/rules_nixpkgs_cc_template/commit/b5837f5a962d47357b6c46ab2987e1f201de025c#r99606695

> TODO: is the flake shell pure? because if this is run on a non-nixos system, and /usr/bin/gcc continues to be visible, that messes things up

Author: If the Nix shell isn't pure, some of the stuff I've written about `@local_config_cc` not working when in the shell and having that extra insulation from accidentally using the non-hermetic toolchain becomes false, doesn't it?

> TODO: is the flake shell pure? because if this is run on a non-nixos system, and /usr/bin/gcc continues to be visible, that messes things up

Reviewer: True, best to double check with `#nix`. I don't see `--pure` flag similar to the `nix-shell` one [on `nix develop`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/unstable/command-ref/new-cli/nix3-develop.html), only `--impure`, but IIUC that is about Nix evaluation rather than the resulting shell environment.

---

Bazel is a modern build system valued for performant, correct, and hermetic
builds. It has a few shortcomings, one of which is that that Bazel is only
hermetic if certain conditions are met, and they aren't in many people's build
setups. In practice, Bazel build products fail to be reproducible because Bazel
silently depends on various things present in the global environment, like a
C++ compiler. This ties into another issue, which is that external dependencies
have to be Bazel-ified in order to be usable from within Bazel. For language
ecosystems where there is widespread adoption of a package manager, this isn't
much of an issue --- for instance, `pip` dependencies are taken care of by
`rules_python`. However, in the case of C/C++ projects or with library headers,
third-party dependencies can still be difficult to manage.

The rules_nixpkgs ruleset enables the use of the extensive Nixpkgs package set
from Bazel, allowing it to provision external dependencies via the Nix package
manager. Nix provides strong hermeticity and reproducibility guarantees for all
build products, which are defined in a language also called Nix. A sizeable

> collection of such package definitions is available in the Nixpkgs repository,

Reviewer 2: Given the general introductory tone of this document, it feels like mentions of technologies and repos like Nixpkgs should have links?

Author: Added some links, but I'm not sure what the best place to link for Nix-the-package-manager/Nix-the-language/etc is... maybe nix.dev?

  - BUILD
  - hello-world.cc
- WORKSPACE
```

where WORKSPACE is empty, and BUILD contains a single `cc_binary` rule:

```bzl
cc_binary(
    name = "hello-world",
    srcs = ["hello-world.cc"],
)
```

`src/hello-world.cc` is simply

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main(int argc, char** argv) {
  std::cout << "Hello world!" << std::endl;
  return 0;
}
```

Verify that this builds:

```
> bazel run //src:hello-world
INFO: Analyzed target //src:hello-world (0 packages loaded, 0 targets configured).
INFO: Found 1 target...
Target //src:hello-world up-to-date:
  bazel-bin/src/hello-world
INFO: Elapsed time: 0.063s, Critical Path: 0.00s
INFO: 1 process: 1 internal.
INFO: Build completed successfully, 1 total action
INFO: Build completed successfully, 1 total action
Hello world!
```

# The lack of hermeticity

Bazel is prized for its hermetic and reproducible builds, but this example
already shows that that isn't completely accurate: we haven't told Bazel what
C++ compiler to use, or where to find it and all the auxiliary tools it relies
on (linker, assembler, and the like). It simply looks for appropriately-named
executables in the PATH and sets up a C/C++ compiler toolchain called

> `@local_config_cc` that "should work". 

Author: Good point, fixed.

This is problematic, and not just because of pedantic concerns regarding the
precise meaning of "hermeticity". We have no control over what compiler is
used: build products output by different versions of the same compiler can vary
greatly, let alone between different compilers. Bazel, by default, chooses GCC
on a Linux machine and Clang/LLVM on a macOS machine, which can mean that the
same bit of hot code, say, vectorizes correctly on one platform but not on the
other due to some difference between the two compilers, resulting in wildly
different performance characteristics. System library versions are not
controlled, so build products will depend on whatever versions of, e.g. `glibc`
are available on the host.

There are Bazel-native ways to mitigate these issues in certain cases, but they

> fall short of true hermeticity.

Author: I wrote that as a replacement for the previous remark about `--incompatible_strict_action_env`, which you noted in your previous review didn't affect CC compilation. I'll update this keeping what you said in mind.

> fall short of true hermeticity.

Author: I removed that bit and folded it into the next paragraph.

# download rules_nixpkgs
http_archive(
    name = "io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs",
    strip_prefix = "rules_nixpkgs-9f08fb2322050991dead17c8d10d453650cf92b7",
    urls = ["https://github.com/tweag/rules_nixpkgs/archive/9f08fb2322050991dead17c8d10d453650cf92b7.tar.gz"],
    sha256 = "46aa0ca80b77848492aa1564e9201de9ed79588ca1284f8a4f76deb7a0eeccb9",
)

# load everything that rules_nixpkgs rules need to work
load("@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs:repositories.bzl", "rules_nixpkgs_dependencies")
rules_nixpkgs_dependencies()
```

Now we can select a version of the Nixpkgs repository from which all of our
packages will be drawn. Any Git commit hash or tag is allowed. This way, we
select a consistent set of package revisions in one go instead of having to
maintain dependency versions for individual dependencies. Often this will be a
tag for a stable release, which ensures that there has been especially
stringent verification that packages in it will function correctly individually
and play well together. Here we use the 22.05 release:

```bazel
load("@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs:nixpkgs.bzl", "nixpkgs_git_repository")
nixpkgs_git_repository(
    name = "nixpkgs",
    revision = "22.05",

>     sha256 = "",

Reviewer 2: Should there be anything about specifying `sha256`, how to find it and why it might be a good idea?

Author: Good idea, added.

Nix to configure this:

```bazel
load("@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs:nixpkgs.bzl", "nixpkgs_cc_configure")
nixpkgs_cc_configure(
  repository = "@nixpkgs",
  # nix_file_content = "(import <nixpkgs> {}).gcc11",
  attribute_path = "gcc11",
  name = "nixpkgs_config_cc",
)
```

`(import <nixpkgs> {})` loads the entire package set into an attribute set
(Nix's equivalent of a record), and `.gcc11` selects one value from it. It is
possible to customize the compiler further using more Nix if desired: you could,
for instance, point Nix to a custom fork of Clang containing support for a new
architecture, and have everything work seamlessly.

With this, we now have a fully hermetic CC toolchain that will behave correctly
across platforms. It remains to tell Bazel to use it by default, instead of
`@local_config_cc`. To do so, we put the following into `.bazelrc` at the root
of the repository:

```
build --host_platform=@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs/platforms:host
build --crosstool_top=@nixpkgs_config_cc//:toolchain
```

Now `bazel build` and `bazel run` should use this toolchain by default for
C/C++ compilation:
```

> > bazel build //src:hello-world

Reviewer 2: This snippet does not "prove" that a different toolchain is indeed used. Perhaps building with `--toolchain_resolution_debug` could illustrate the switch better?

Author: Added a note

INFO: Analyzed target //src:hello-world (42 packages loaded, 177 targets configured).
INFO: Found 1 target...
Target //src:hello-world up-to-date:
  bazel-bin/src/hello-world
INFO: Elapsed time: 0.377s, Critical Path: 0.22s
INFO: 6 processes: 4 internal, 2 linux-sandbox.
INFO: Build completed successfully, 6 total actions
```

# Making Nix optional

It is entirely possible to make the use of Nix optional in a Bazel setup. To do
so, we use `bazelrc` configs to only enable Nix-specific configuration when a

> `--config` flag is provided, like so:

Author: Hadn't thought about that, I'll make a note of this. 

As for defining a non-Nix toolchain, the `rules_cc_toolchains()` call takes care of that, right?

> `--config` flag is provided, like so:

Author: I've added a note about this; could you check that it makes sense? (I wasn't really sure what the "default bindist" specifically referred to.)

> `--config` flag is provided, like so:

Reviewer: Thanks, yes, that makes sense. The exact shape of the "default bindist" depends on the language. With cc its implicit since it's builtin to Bazel. With other languages it would be your `rules_XXX_toolchains` call, or similar that sets this up, e.g. [here for Go](https://github.com/tweag/rules_nixpkgs/blob/56b9cff9d175b916abdb36920a669b1face49e04/examples/toolchains/go/WORKSPACE#L45).

```
build:nix --host_platform=@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs/platforms:host
build:nix --crosstool_top=@nixpkgs_config_cc//:toolchain
```

None of these options will apply to `bazel build` or `bazel run` unless an
extra `--config nix` parameter is passed:

```
> bazel run //src:hello-world --config=nix
...
```

# Working from a Nix-provided developer environment

The `nix-shell` command we used to get a Nix-provided Bazel was the simplest

> example of a Nix developer environment, but they can provide developers on a
> complex project with a lot more convenience. We can create development

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
example of a Nix developer environment, but it can be more sophisticated.
We can create development
```

environments that all contributors on a project can use with zero setup. These
shells provide consistent versions of libraries for whichever languages are
used in the project as well as for system dependencies.

> We haven't _disabled_ Bazel's deep-rooted tendency to depend on the global

Reviewer 2: This is not entirely true, or at least confusing for me. One could argue that we partially disabled it earlier when we used

```
build --host_platform=@io_tweag_rules_nixpkgs//nixpkgs/platforms:host
build --crosstool_top=@nixpkgs_config_cc//:toolchain
```

Maybe rephrase it to make clear that without special care and options like the ones above Bazel might be influenced by its environment?

Author: Done.

environment. Indeed, you can rename `.bazelrc` and rerun `bazel run`, and
everything will work just fine: Bazel will simply fall back to
`@local_config_cc`, because a C++ compiler toolchain is still globally
available.

We can provide a Nix developer environment that hermetically provides the specific
dependencies that developers need and nothing else:

```nix

> {

Reviewer 2: This snippet is incomplete at least in the sense that you do not say how to name a file like this and where to put it, which is important. Another thought might be that a `shell.nix` might be a more straightforward entry point than `flake.nix`.

Author: Good catch, thanks.

Re: a `shell.nix`, I also considered that approach, but the argument against that is that 1. shell.nix relies on a global `<nixpkgs>` by default and 2. even with some kind of nixpkgs pinning, updating that nixpkgs version is more involved than the `nix flake update` interface.

      let pkgs = import nixpkgs { inherit system; };
      in {
        # ... and define a development shell for it ...
        devShells.default =
          # ... with no globally-available CC toolchain ...
          pkgs.mkShellNoCC {
            name = "rules_nixpkgs_shell";
            # ... which makes available the following dependencies, 
            # all sourced from the `pkgs` package set:
            packages = with pkgs; [ bazel_5 bazel-buildtools cacert nix git ];
          };
      });

}
```

We've also removed the "default" system-wide CC toolchain: the commonly-used
`mkShell` function creates a development shell with a given set of available
dependencies _and_ a default CC toolchain, so we've replaced it with
`mkShellNoCC`, which, as the name suggests, does the same job but without
implicitly making a CC toolchain available. This means it's no longer possible
to unintentionally use `@local_config_cc`, as that toolchain won't be able to
find the global binaries it wants and will fail to work.

Now developers on different platforms can enter a development environment by
running `nix develop`, and this environment will be identical across platforms.

> This can be made even more seamless by using [direnv](direnv), which has support for Nix flakes:

Reviewer 2: This is the first time you mention flakes explicitly, and it is confusing for someone who is not familiar with Nix, i.e. your target audience IIUC.

Author: I reworded this to skip "flakes" and just mention the flake.nix file.

Author: I also added a link to our "intro to flakes" blog posts.

```
$ echo `use flake` > .envrc
$ direnv allow
```

> With this, this environment will be entered automatically when in this directory.

Reviewer 2: Too many "this"?

> 

Author: Made a first pass at this.

> 

Reviewer: Thank you, that looks great!

# A guide to rules_nixpkgs

TODO: is the flake shell pure? because if this is run on a non-nixos system, and /usr/bin/gcc continues to be visible, that messes things up
TODO: document nixpkgs.nix

---

> Bazel is a modern build system valued for performant, correct, and hermetic
> builds. It has a few shortcomings, one of which is that that Bazel is only
> hermetic if certain conditions are met, and they aren't in many people's build

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bazel is a modern build system valued for fast and correct builds.
Fast, thanks to advanced caching and distributed builds.
Correct, in that build artifacts always reflect the state of their declared inputs. In other words, you should never have to run `bazel clean`.
Bazel's caching and distributed build features depend on correct build definitions.

Bazel build actions run in isolation to ensure that their build definitions are correct and capture all requirements.
This is referred to as "hermeticity": A build is hermetic if there are no external influences on it. However, Bazel is only
hermetic if certain conditions are met, and they aren't in many people's build
```
This uses some Bazel jargon, like "hermetic", without explanation. Maybe it could be expanded a bit to be more approachable to people not embedded in that jargon, yet.

Author: Good point, done (and similarly elsewhere throughout the document)

setups. In practice, Bazel build products fail to be reproducible because Bazel
silently depends on various things present in the global environment, like a

> C++ compiler. This ties into another issue, which is that external dependencies

Reviewer: Perhaps the external deps thing should be its own paragraph. Yes, it's related, and rules_nixpkgs covers both, but it's still a somewhat separate concern.

Author: Done

        devShells.default =
          # ... with no globally-available CC toolchain ...
          pkgs.mkShellNoCC {
            name = "rules_nixpkgs_shell";
            # ... which makes available the following dependencies, 
            # all sourced from the `pkgs` package set:
            packages = with pkgs; [ bazel_5 bazel-buildtools cacert nix git ];
          };
      });

}
```

(For more about the `flake.nix` format, [this][flake-post] series of articles on
the Tweag blog may be helpful.)

We've also removed the "default" system-wide CC toolchain. The usual way to
define a development shell is with the commonly-used `mkShell` Nix function,
which creates a development shell with a given set of available dependencies
_and_ a default CC toolchain. We've replaced it with `mkShellNoCC`, which, as
the name suggests, does the same job but without implicitly making a CC
toolchain available. This means it's no longer possible to unintentionally use
`@local_config_cc`, as that toolchain won't be able to find the global binaries
it wants and will fail to work.

Now developers on different platforms can enter a development environment by

> running `nix develop`, and this environment will be identical across platforms.

Reviewer: > this environment will be identical across platforms

Nit: I think I know what you're getting at, but it's a bit ambiguous. Is the user-guide only targeting Linux or is it also expected to work on MacOS? The reason I'm asking: Arguably "across platforms" would also mean across Linux and MacOS. But, in that case the environment is not identical, on MacOS it'll include Darwin executables instead of Linux ones.

Author: I've changed this to "consistent" instead of "identical". 

As for the first question: I wrote the guide with Linux in mind, but is there a reason why the guide wouldn't work on macOS?

Author: I've changed this to "consistent" instead of "identical". 

As for the first question: I wrote the guide with Linux in mind. Not sure if it would work elsewhere, but perhaps we can investigate macOS compatibility and try to make it work if we have a reasonable number of macOS users.

Reviewer: Makes sense. Focusing on Linux first seems perfectly fair and I'm happy to leave MacOS for follow-up work. In that case it should just be stated somewhere that this guide is only targeting Linux and we'd also need an issue on rules_nixpkgs to track the MacOS support.

        devShells.default =

          # ... with no globally-available CC toolchain ...
          pkgs.mkShellNoCC {
            name = "rules_nixpkgs_shell";

            # ... which makes available the following dependencies, 
            # all sourced from the `pkgs` package set:
            packages = with pkgs; [ bazel_5 bazel-buildtools cacert nix git ];
          };
      });
}
```

It's not necessary at this juncture to understand the details of the Nix code
above. (For those curious, [this][flake-post] series of articles on the Tweag
blog is a good start.) It's worth noting the `packages = ...` line, however. The
square brackets, as you might expect, set off a _list_ in Nix, with elements
separated (admittedly a bit oddly) by whitespace. If you need packages in your
development shell that aren't listed there already (compilers, development
tools, editors, anything at all) you can add them to the `packages` list, and
they'll become available within the shell when you enter it. In order to search
for the package you want in Nixpkgs, there is a [package
search](https://search.nixos.org/packages) function available on the Nixpkgs
website.

> (TODO: this is false without --ignore-environment, which we haven't put into the

Author: Not sure what to do here; `--ignore-environment` seems to not reset everything, and even if it did, it can't be used (directly) from direnv. I've asked again on #nix on Slack.

> (TODO: this is false without --ignore-environment, which we haven't put into the

Author: The only idea I have at this point is using `flake-compat` and getting a shell.nix and doing `use nix --pure`, which _is_ supported.

> (TODO: this is false without --ignore-environment, which we haven't put into the

Author: I've rewritten the section, but it feels a little bit like lying by omission if we talk a big game about how good Nix shells are for testing software interactively without unnecessary dependencies and then provide a shell setup that isn't.

The hermeticity/correctness of the rules_nixpkgs-based Bazel build itself doesn't depend on this, though, as far as I know, so I suppose this setup won't actually create any incorrect builds. We can leave it at this for a first draft until we find a better solution.

the `nixos-22.05` tag, and we can pull the latest commit from that branch using:

```
$ nix flake lock --update-input nixpkgs
```

It is also possible to change the Nixpkgs dependency to any branch: for
instance, we could switch to `master` and receive bleeding-edge dependencies, or
(more practically) we could choose to follow a newer tag (22.11 is available
right now) by making the following change in `flake.nix`:

```diff
-    nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-22.05";
+    nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-22.11";
```

To update _all_ dependencies, one uses:

```
$ nix flake update
```

In the current example, this doesn't change much, since the only dependency we
have apart from Nixpkgs itself is `flake-utils`, which doesn't change much.
However, if you integrate more Nix-based dependencies or utilities into your
shell, this will take care of all of them in one go, and update the `flake.lock`
to include all of the changes.

## Using `direnv` with Nix

The use of this feature can be made even more seamless by using
[direnv](direnv), which has support for the `flake.nix` file we used to describe
the development shell.

> Put the following in a file called `.envrc` at the root of the repo:

Reviewer: The `.envrc` file is currently missing in `examples/cc-template`. Was the intention to include it?

Author: Yep, thanks for the catch. (`.envrc` is in my global gitignore.)
